# Exploring the Relationship Between Reviews Sentiment and Length, Price in Amazon Reviews
## Introduction
This project started to fulfill the Technology Project requirement of the **CS410: Text Information Systems** course at the University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign. I expect to continue its development as I progress in my Master in CS and apply concepts and knowledge from other disciplines.

With support from my TA Ismini Lourentzou, I decided to explore the relationship between the sentiment inferred on reviews by Amazon users and the price of the goods purchased, under the hypothesis that review length and their tone are predictors of product price. It is a very naïve expectation based on the hypothesis that a high price would command a longer explanation, and that higher prices generally bring more positive reviews.

To explore this hypothesis, I used the [datasets](http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/) made available by [Julian McAuley](julian.mcauley@gmail.com). The website above provides a detailed explanation of the data schema and how to parse the files for use in applications. Since the files are quite large, for the purpose of this course I will make them temporarily available in a [publicly available share](https://uofi.box.com/s/lmutpr56zevns6q4tx9rl1r4dr3t9o3k) for replicating and grading my work.
## Datasets Description
The data I am using are split into two files:

- Product Review

```
{
"reviewerID": "A2SUAM1J3GNN3B",
"asin": "0000013714",
"reviewerName": "J. McDonald",
"helpful": [2, 3],
"reviewText": "I bought this for my husband... Great purchase though!",
"overall": 5.0,
"summary": "Heavenly Highway Hymns",
"unixReviewTime": 1252800000,
"reviewTime": "09 13, 2009"
}
```

For our purpose, we will only use the `asin` as a key to join with the metadata information, and sentiment and text relevant fields, `helpful`, `reviewText`, and `overall`.

- Review Metadata

```
{
  "asin": "0000031852",
  "title": "Girls Ballet Tutu Zebra Hot Pink",
  "price": 3.17,
  "imUrl": "http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/...",
  "related":
  {
	  "also_bought": ["B00JHONN1S", "B002BZX8Z6",..., "B00BFXLZ8M"],
	  "bought_together": ["B002BZX8Z6"]
  },
  "salesRank": {"Toys & Games": 211836},
  "brand": "Coxlures",
  "categories": [["Sports & Outdoors", "Other Sports", "Dance"]]
}
```

Again, we only need `asin` for our join, and `price`.

## Work Description
At its current stage, the project main artifact is the Python 3 script `amznreviews.py`. The key requirements are the Pandas package for data manipulation and the NLTK package for sentiment analysis. I am also including additional scripts related but not relevant for this project that were used in initial stages of the project to explore indexing concepts (with the `whoosh` package) and to use the Microsoft Azure Text Analytics REST API for sentiment analysis.

To comply with the project requirements, this script can be used with any of the files provided in the website of reference and the dataset I provide. By default, it uses the smallest of these dataset pairs (`meta_Musical_Instruments.json.gz`and `reviews_Musical_Instruments.json.gz`) but it can be used with any of the dataset pairs available as:
> `python3 amznreviews.py reviewsFile metadataFile`

The only screen output is the correlation matrix for all the original numerical features in the joined dataset plus the additional features that I will describe below. Other artifacts are placed in the `data_out` directory as follows:

- `all_features_with_sentiment_merge.csv` file, that can be used for further analysis in R or re-imported in Python for additional exploration. I used this file to prepare in R a more attractive visual than the one generated by the Python script, and stored as `corrplot.png`.
- `corrplot.png` is a Seaborn generated heat map of the correlation metric to visually inspect the relationship between the features of interest.

A second artifact, the R script `corplot.R` was written for the simple purpose of beautifying the output of the Python script to generate a more insightful visual of the correlations between the features. When executed, it takes the output of the Python script and produces two plots:

- `corplotR.png` is a correlogram that simultaneously represents the correlations strength and values for all pairwise combinations of features.
- `corplotValuesR.png` is a simpler correlation representation that only shows the correlation values.

## Features
The datasets will need to be preprocessed before any analysis is done to ensure that the data conform to the schema needed to apply the sentiment analysis. Additionally, new features will be added to explore the relationships between price, rating, usefulness, and text content of the reviews. This is a description of the added features:
- `reviewLength`: calculated as the number of characters in the product review.
- `reviewWords`: calculated as the number of words in the product review. It is implemented as a regular expression pattern match. Unfortunately, the decision to use NLTK came the the project was already under way, but it might have been more efficient to use the provided word tokenizer.
- `avgWordLength`: calculated as the quotient of `reviewWLength` divided by `reviewWords`. It was intended to provide a measurement of sophistication in expression (e.g.: using longer words).
- `expressiveness`: calculated as the ratio of number of words in a review divided by the average length in word of all reviews. Also intended as a normalization of review length relative to other reviewers.
- `ratingDelta` and `priceDelta` are like `expresiveness` a normalization of rating and price relative to their respective averages.
- `usefulness`: since the `helpful` field as available is a pair of values indicating how many of the review viewers have voted it as useful, it needs to be transformed into a numerical feature. It is represented as the ratio of helpful=rated reviews to the total of rated reviews by the community.

## Exploration
The scope and output of this report is limited by time constraints and most importantly, my learning the use of the tools required as I was building the project. Not having a Computer Science background meant having to learn `Pandas` for data wrangling, `NLTK` for sentiment analysis, JSON manipulation for conforming the output to the expected input by the Azure Sentiment Analysis API, and in general commonplace practices in Data Exploration that I was unfamiliar with.

Under these constraints, 


# Appendix
## 1. Discarded Explorations.
