# Exploring the Relationship Between Reviews Sentiment and Length and Price in Amazon Reviews
## Introduction
This project started to fulfill the Technology Project requirement of the **CS410: Text Information Systems** course at the University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign. I expect to continue its development as I progress in my Master in CS and apply concepts and knowledge from other disciplines.
With support from my TA Ismini Lourentzou, I decided to explore the relationship between the sentiment inferred on reviews by Amazon users and the price of the goods purchased, under the hypothesis that review length and their tone are predictors of product price. It is a very naïve expectation based on the hypothesis that a high price would command a longer explanation, and that higher prices generally bring more positive reviews.
To explore this hypothesis, I used the [datasets](http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/) made available[^R. He, J. McAuley. Modeling the visual evolution of fashion trends with one-class collaborative filtering. WWW, 2016
J. McAuley, C. Targett, J. Shi, A. van den Hengel. Image-based recommendations on styles and substitutes. SIGIR, 2015] by [Julian McAuley](julian.mcauley@gmail.com). The website above provides a detailed explanation of the data schema and how to parse the files for use in applications. Since the files are quite large, for the purpose of this course I will make them temporarily available in a [publicly available share](https://1drv.ms/f/s!AvRNoFBBmBYel6c5JET759VwYtiK0g) for replicating and grading my work.
## Datasets Description
The data I am using are split into two files:
1. Product Review
```
{
"reviewerID": "A2SUAM1J3GNN3B",
"asin": "0000013714",
"reviewerName": "J. McDonald",
"helpful": [2, 3],
"reviewText": "I bought this for my husband... Great purchase though!",
"overall": 5.0,
"summary": "Heavenly Highway Hymns",
"unixReviewTime": 1252800000,
"reviewTime": "09 13, 2009"
}
```
For our purpose, we will only use the `asin` as a key to join with the metadata information, and sentiment and text relevant fields, `helpful`, `reviewText`, and `overall`.
2. Review Metadata
```
{
  "asin": "0000031852",
  "title": "Girls Ballet Tutu Zebra Hot Pink",
  "price": 3.17,
  "imUrl": "http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/...",
  "related":
  {
	  "also_bought": ["B00JHONN1S", "B002BZX8Z6",..., "B00BFXLZ8M"],
	  "bought_together": ["B002BZX8Z6"]
  },
  "salesRank": {"Toys & Games": 211836},
  "brand": "Coxlures",
  "categories": [["Sports & Outdoors", "Other Sports", "Dance"]]
}
```
Again, we only need `asin` for our join, and `price`.
## Work Description
At its current stage, the project main artifact is the Python 3 script `amznreviews.py`. The key requirements are the Pandas package for data manipulation and the NLTK package for sentiment analysis. I am also including additional scripts related but not relevant for this project that were used in initial stages of the project to explore indexing concepts (with the `whoosh` package) and to use the Microsoft Azure Text Analytics REST API for sentiment analysis.
To comply with the project requirements, this script can be used with any of the files provided in the website of reference and the dataset I provide. By default, it uses the smallest of these dataset pairs (`meta_Musical_Instruments.json.gz`and `reviews_Musical_Instruments.json.gz`) but it can be used with any of the dataset pairs available as:
> `python3 amznreviews.py reviewsFile metadataFile`

The only screen output is the correlation matrix for all the original numerical features in the joined dataset plus the additional features that I will describe below. Other artifacts are placed in the `data_out` directory as follows:
- `all_features_with_sentiment_merge.csv` file, that can be used for further analysis in R or re-imported in Python for additional exploration. I used this file to prepare in R a more attractive visual than the one generated by the Python script, and stored as `corrplorR.png`.
- `corrplot.png` is a Seaborn generated heat map of the correlation metric to visually 

## Appendix
### 1. Initial (And Discarded) Explorations.
